Hi, my name is Sophie Beiers. Thank you for watching my video. I'm super honored to be
a part of this conference. I definitely wish that we could all be in person. But in the
meantime, welcome to my kitchen. I'm excited to talk to you a little bit about my process
in creating data visualizations and data driven stories at the ACLU. So just a little bit
about me. I'm a data journalist at the ACLU where I analyze data for our lawyers' legal
arguments and visualize and report on our data for external advocacy purposes. I'm only
a few years into being a part of the R community, so I'm really excited to be here. So to start,
what is data science and data journalism more broadly at the ACLU? Some of you might know
and remember Brooke Matabuanwu, who spoke at the 2019 RStudio conference about her data
work in helping reunify children that were separated from their families while seeking
refuge in our country. She happens to be my awesome manager and colleague, and I felt
she recently summed up our work in just one slack that reads, the lawyer called our analysis
both deeply disturbing and extremely helpful, which might just be the slogan for our team.
This leads me to an important word to define, terribulous, which is commonly used on our
team as a way of expressing excitement over being able to prove usually terrible news
with quantitative evidence. Our analysis of the data that we receive often uncovers disparities
that hold up in court and help our lawyers win their legal arguments. But in all seriousness,
what this often means is the data that we are privileged to analyze represent real human
beings who are being harmed in one way or another. I'll briefly share with you a few
examples of what this might mean. For example, each row in this data was a person that was
filed for eviction. We found in this case that filings for eviction impacted black women
at alarmingly disproportionate rates. Another example is this recent report that we put
out where we found that black people, despite using marijuana at the same rates as white
people, are still being disproportionately arrested for possession of marijuana. We
also found that people of color were more likely to have their driver's licenses suspended
due to unpaid and often unaffordable fines and fees. And we were able to visualize the
story of two black women whose lives were turned upside down without the ability to
use their cars. All in all, I've been really lucky to be a part of these and other data
journalistic projects during my time at the ACLU. So I wanted to talk to you a little
bit about the process that I often go through and the key steps I take in creating my data
visualizations. This will include the feedback that I sometimes receive, what I've done or
not done with that feedback, and other considerations that I think are important in getting to a
final result. So some of you might be thinking that it's just this easy. You go from data
analysis to visualization, you're good, you have a great viz, and you can go on and just
enjoy your weekend. Maybe even I thought that at one point, based on this flack evidence,
when I was analyzing data a few months into the pandemic and came to the conclusion that
actually letting incarcerated people out of jails had no effect on crime levels nearby.
Spoiler, this is not the process, but it was the finding. The actual process in my experience
can be really messy and definitely not linear. But I'll share with you the key elements and
considerations to take that I believe have set me up for a success for projects like
this. First, you'll get some data. A lot of the time for us here, that means that a lawyer
will have some kind of data that they've obtained through the discovery process or through a
FOIA request, and a lot of times we'll just use publicly available data. Next, you'll
use R to read and explore that data. During the exploration process, I use the tidyverse
quite a bit, but also the janitor package is one of my favorites to make easy tables,
and always ggplot2 to find quick trends and actually start visualizing my findings.
So this is important. By now, you'll want to start thinking about what are your main
points that you found in your exploration that you want to visualize and make clear.
Ask yourself, does my visualization support and highlight my main point? You'll also want
to carefully consider your audience. Is your audience made of purely academics? Are they
advocates? Are they people who know a lot about your topic already, or maybe they know
nothing at all? It's also good to ask for feedback on your visualizations from various
people. You'll want to be specific about the main points that you're trying to visualize
before receiving feedback about whether those main points are coming through clearly or not to those people.
And then you might find that once you receive feedback, you'll start iterating on your
database, which means you'll likely need to go kind of back and forth and check a lot
of these boxes again. The process could end up looking a lot like this. Now, to show you
how I've gone about using this process in practice, I'll go through these steps once
more with a real-life example. For the purposes of the example that I'll use, I'll need to
start with a little bit of background on this recent project that our team worked on. Sometime
into the very beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, it became really clear that people in jails
and people that were incarcerated in America, which, by the way, has the highest incarceration
rate in the world in particular, would be at risk. Incarcerated people are subject to
extreme overcrowding, and jails often lack the resources and facilities that allow for
handwashing and other hygienic practices that are necessary to slow the spread of COVID-19.
So it was really clear that in order to save lives, action had to be taken, and it had
to be taken quickly. Our team partnered with academic researchers to build a model that
accounted for the dynamics of the jail system and estimated the additional illnesses and
loss of life that we'd expect if none of these preventative measures were taken. We
recommended reducing arrests such that people were only being arrested for the most serious
incidents and promptly releasing people who were pre-trial or charged for low-level crimes
or were particularly vulnerable to the disease and posed no risk of immediate threat to others.
All in all, the team estimated that taking these precautions could save 100,000 human
lives, both inside the jails and in their surrounding communities. Many communities
did begin prioritizing the lives of incarcerated people and the people who worked within jails.
Some localities reduced low-level arrests, or set bond at zero, or released a subset
of incarcerated people. But there was some backlash. Some people were worried that taking
these actions would result in a huge spike in crime in the surrounding communities, despite
research showing that in New York City, for instance, people released from jails due to
COVID were rearrested at lower rates than even expected. To quell these concerns further,
our team analyzed trends in reported crimes during the initial three months of the pandemic
in 29 of the largest US cities where data was available and released this report with
our findings. For the purposes of this project, our goal was to find whether there was any
relationship between the change in county jail populations and the reported crime rate
in the closest metropolitan area. So, back to the process, starting with the data step.
We needed two categories of data, one for county jail populations and one that showed
the number of crimes reported in the nearest city. These were ultimately the 29 locations
for which I could find quality reported crime data for, for the time periods necessary that
were either aggregated daily, weekly, or monthly for all of 2019 through May 2020 that we could
also find jail population information for. So, we needed both. We collected this data
a bit in piecemeal, mainly through Googling for specific county sheriff's offices or finding
public open data sets. We ended up downloading countless CSVs and Excel files and even PDFs
kind of continuously whenever we noticed a bit, a new bit of data had dropped. Hence,
the circular arrow around the data step. We also used the Vera Institute's data that
tracked the number of people in each county jail over time and we ended up using the specific
dates of February 29th and April 30th to calculate the percent change in jail population. Because
most jails took action early on in the pandemic, we looked at the crime rates during the time
period of March through May 2019 and compared those to the same time period in 2020. And
then to sort of standardize the way that we analyzed crime, and also because many of
these cities' crime data sets only included these types of crimes, we focused on part
one crimes, which are defined by the Uniform Crime Reporting Program, and they encompass
the most frequently reported violent and property crimes. You'll see that data exploration here
was super messy for me. This is an example of what I saw using this function for my very
favorite janitor package on the crime description column in just one city. During my exploration,
I created this plot in R, which showed the relationship between the magnitude of the
change in jail population and the magnitude of the change in crime during that same time
frame. Now, it could be really tempting to draw a regression line and to try and focus
on some type of significant correlation that just isn't there. I received feedback from
my colleagues that this graph focused a little bit too much on sort of the outliers, which
were one location that increased their jail population, and one location where there was
more reported crime than in the previous year. It was then I realized that one of the most
important main points that I could make was actually the lack of relationship between
X and Y. So after lots of data cleaning and trying out more charts and receiving more
feedback, these were the three main points that I wanted to make clear in my report and
visualize to my audience. One, crime was not on the rise compared to the same time period
the year prior. Crime rates were instead right within normal range or even lower. Second,
most of the locales that we found data for did decrease their jail populations during
this time period. And like I said before, just one location actually increased its population.
Lastly, and importantly, we found no relationship between the county jail population and its
increase or decrease and the number of crimes that were reported. So once I decided on these
main points, it was time to come up with a few mock-ups of graphs that I thought would
clearly express these. Of course, though, this is not always easy, especially when you
realize that you need to take your audience into consideration. So unfortunately, this
is an example of a time where I thought I nailed it, I'd come to the perfect solution,
but I hadn't yet considered our audience. So this is a graph that shows the 29 locations
in order of the percent change in jail population. The gray bar indicates the range of monthly
crimes between January 2018 and February 2020, and the three dots indicate the number
of monthly crimes reported in March, April, and May of 2020. You'll see that a lot of
the time. The three dots are to the left of the gray bar, but never are they to the right
of the gray bar, which indicates that reported crime during these first few months of the
pandemic were within normal or expected range or lower. I will give credit to Lucia, our
chief analytics officer, for scribbling down this idea in Slack, of course, but will give
credit to myself for what I felt was kind of incredible execution. The team of data
scientists, of course, loved it. I thought I was basically done. But let's remember,
your audience is key. So the next day, I received the following feedback from several non-analytics
folks. It honestly was a little bit like reading my own bad reviews, but it's important
not to look at constructive feedback that way. These colleagues were speaking up about
some major issues with this graph. You might agree. I agree now. They were right. I see
feedback that's qualified with things like, I'm not a numbers person. A lot. People sometimes
blame themselves for not knowing how to interpret a data viz, but it's actually really our job
to make sure that the viz works for them and works for our audience. So this crimes
and decarceration report was not just for data scientists. It was for a far more general
audience, and this chart was clearly not working. So sometimes this means going back to the
drawing board, doing a little bit more data exploration, always with the janitor and ggplot
packages for me, and trying out sort of new ways of visualizing your main points while
thinking about your audience. These charts were hashtag innoventive, but they simply
weren't working. Some of the most valuable feedback conversations I had were not over
Slack, so I have no hard evidence, but in the times that you're asking for feedback
from someone, it's really important to ask the why behind something isn't working for
them. Sometimes the why might be sort of surprising, or maybe it'll make you actually realize that
what you need to do is add better annotating, rather than just scrapping the whole thing
and starting over. And in the spirit of reiterating that this process was one messy adventure,
before showing you the final visualizations we ended up with, at the end of the day, I
really feel like this quote just kind of drives it all home.
So these were the final graphics that we published on our site. Both were created in R and touched
up in Illustrator. Both, I feel, do a good job of expressing our three main points, and
are not just interpretable for quote numbers people. I know these are probably a little
bit hard to see, so I'll share a link to my report in my presentation, as well as where
you can find the R code for the analysis in Viz.
And one last wrench I'll throw at you, because it was thrown at me, was that it turns out
police data is often dynamic, meaning that sometimes crimes that occurred actually maybe
a month ago could have been reported today. I cannot stress enough how much of a lifesaver
reusable code in R was throughout this process, given the amount of extremely last minute
data dumps and sort of changing out CSV files here and there. We want it to be precise,
and it's thanks to R that remaking these graphs time and time again was such a small deal.
So hopefully through this process, I've been able to convince you that data Viz is and
should often be non-linear. Mentors in my life have taught me that being good at making
effective visualizations is not about getting from point A to point B the quickest. It's
actually about carefully considering each of these points that makes you an effective
communicator to your audience.
Lastly, feel free to reach out to me if you have any questions or just want to nerd out
about data Viz. And thank you.